 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
1 
 
Regulations 
Regulations 
Regulations 
 
Protection of Individuals Receiving Services in Facilities Operated and/or 
Certified by OPWDD 
 
Amendments to 14 NYCRR Part 633.16 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Effective Date: Upon Adoption 
 
• Existing 14 NYCRR Part 633.16 is retitled as follows: 
Protection of Individuals Receiving Services in Facilities Operated and/or Certified by 
[OMRDD] OPWDD 
 
• Existing paragraph 633.16(a)(1) is amended to read as follows: 
 
(1) 
This section applies to: 
 
 
(i) 
all residential facilities certified or operated by OPWDD, including 
 
 
 
family care homes; 
 
 
(ii) 
all facilities certified by OPWDD, except: 
 
 
 
(a) 
free standing respite, except as described in section  
 
 
 
635-10.5(h) of this Title; 
 
 
 
(b) 
clinic treatment facilities (see Part 679 of this Title); and 
 
 
 
(c) 
diagnostic and research clinics (see Part 676 of this Title); 
 
 
(iii) 
day habilitation services (whether or not provided in a certified 
 
 
 
facility); 
 
 
(iv) 
prevocational services (whether or not provided in a certified  
 
 
 
facility); and 
 
 
(v) 
community habilitation [(both hourly and Phase II)]. 
 
• Existing paragraphs 633.16(a)(4), (5) and (6) are deleted. 
 
• Existing subdivision 633.16(b) is amended as follows: 
(2)  
Assessment, functional behavior[al]. A process intended to: identify and 
 
operationally describe challenging behavior(s); identify the function(s) or
 
purpose(s) for challenging behavior; and to identify the specific
 
environmental stimuli or conditions that are maintaining the challenging
 
behavior(s). (See subdivision (d) of this section.) 
* 
* 
* 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 (9) 
Blocking pad.  See pad, blocking 
 
(10) 
Clothing, modified (for use).  Clothing that does not restrict free 
 
 
 
movement, but is designed or used to decrease or prevent challenging 
 
 
behavior (e.g., jumpsuit, leotard, or custom-designed clothing such as 
 
 
shirts or pants made of non-shreddable cloth) by limiting or preventing 
 
 
access to a portion or portions of a person’s body or by using material that 
 
 
cannot easily be ripped, torn or shredded.  “Modified” refers to modified 
 
 
use of clothing such that it is clothing that is being used for a specific 
 
 
reason related to challenging behavior.  Modified clothing is considered a 
 
 
type of mechanical restraint. 
 
(11[9]) Committee, behavior plan/human rights. A committee which has the 
 
 
responsibility to protect the rights of persons whose behavior support 
 
 
plans incorporate the use of any restrictive/intrusive intervention and/or 
 
 
limitation on a person’s rights in order to prevent, manage, and/or control 
 
 
challenging behavior, and which exercises this responsibility through the 
 
 
process of reviewing and approving proposed behavior support plans. 
 
(12[0]) Committee, informed consent. A committee which has the authority to 
 
 
give informed consent for:  
 
 
(i) 
a behavior support plan incorporating the use of any  
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive intervention and/or the use of medication to 
 
 
 
treat a co-occurring diagnosed psychiatric disorder;[,]  
 
 
(ii) 
[or for] the short-term use of medication with no behavior support 
 
 
 
plan;[,] or  
 
 
(iii) 
the use of medications or interventions used as part of Medical 
 
 
 
Immobilization/Protective Stabilization (MIPS) and Sedation for 
 
 
 
Medical/Dental Appointments, when the individual lacks capacity to 
 
 
 
consent and there is no other authorized surrogate available  
 
 
 
(except for a court). (See subdivision (g) of this section.) 
 
(13[1])  
Conditioning, aversive. The contingent application of a physical 
 
 
 
stimulus or device to a person's body or senses in order to modify 
 
 
 
or change behavior. Such a stimulus or device must be reasonably 
 
 
 
considered to be uncomfortable, painful, or noxious to the person 
 
 
 
when applied. Examples of such stimuli may include, but are not 
 
 
 
limited to: water and other mists or sprays, noxious odors (e.g., 
 
 
 
ammonia), noxious tastes (e.g., hot sauce), corporal punishment 
 
 
 
(e.g., slapping, spanking, hitting, or pinching), air blasts, blindfolds, 
 
 
 
white noise helmets, and electric skin shock (see paragraph 
(17[15]) of 
 
 
 
this subdivision). 
 
(14[2]) Conflict of interest. See Interest, conflict of. 
 
(15[3]) Consent, informed. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
3 
 
 
(16[4]) Device, mechanical restraining. Any physical apparatus or equipment 
 
 
placed on or worn by the individual and used to limit or control challenging 
 
 
behavior, that does not meet the definition of modified clothing (see  
 
 
paragraph (10) of this subdivision). This apparatus or equipment cannot 
 
 
be easily removed by the person and may restrict the free movement, or 
 
 
normal functioning, or normal access to a portion or portions of a person’s 
 
 
body, or may totally immobilize a person. (See paragraph (j)(4) of this 
 
 
section for requirements specific to the use of mechanical restraining 
 
 
devices.) 
 
(17[5]) Electric skin shock. The application to a person’s body of an electronic 
 
 
skin shock device in an effort to modify or change behavior. Such a device 
 
 
is reasonably considered to be uncomfortable, painful, or noxious to the 
 
 
person when applied. This definition is not applicable to the use of  
 
 
electroconvulsive therapy provided in a hospital setting and used as a 
 
 
treatment for specific psychiatric disorders. 
 
(18[6]) Emergency. A term that describes a situation posing an immediate health 
 
 
or safety risk to the person or to others that is unexpected, unforeseen, or 
 
 
unanticipated, and for which procedures have not been specified in a 
 
 
person’s behavior support plan to address how the staff is to handle the 
 
 
emergent situation. 
 
(19[7]) Functional behavior[al] assessment. See assessment, functional 
 
 
 
behavior[al]. 
 
(20[18]) Guardian. A party appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction to make 
 
 
or assist a person to make personal and/or financial decisions in situations 
 
 
in which the person is deemed not to have capacity to make those  
 
 
decisions. 
 
(21[19]) Immobilize, totally. The complete curbing of the movement of both arms 
 
 
and both legs, and/or torso through the use of (but not limited to): 
 
(22[0]) Instructor. A party employed by OPWDD, or by an agency certified or 
 
 
authorized by OPWDD, who has been approved to teach a curriculum 
 
 
approved by OPWDD on the use of positive behavioral approaches, 
 
 
strategies and/or supports and physical intervention techniques. 
 
(23[1]) Instructor-trainer. A party employed by OPWDD, or by an agency certified 
 
 
or authorized by OPWDD, who has been approved to teach a curriculum 
 
 
approved by OPWDD on the use of positive behavioral approaches, 
 
 
strategies and/or supports and physical intervention techniques and  
 
 
further certified by OPWDD to train, mentor and certify new Instructors in 
 
 
the teaching and implementation of the training curriculum. An instructor 
 
 
trainer also reviews and/or approves modified physical intervention  
 
 
techniques as necessary. 
 
(24[2]) Interest, conflict of. Any real or perceived financial, personal or other 
 
 
interest, which may impede the impartial discharge of the party’s duties. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
4 
 
 
(25[3]) Intervention, physical. Those intervention techniques, or the adaptations 
 
 
of such, that either include hands-on techniques that deflect, protect from, 
 
 
or release hits, kicks or grabs by persons receiving services toward others 
 
 
in their environment, or holds of limited duration that may reduce, limit, or 
 
 
restrict an individual’s freedom of movement in order to interrupt or control 
 
 
challenging behavior that is posing an immediate health or safety risk to 
 
 
the person or to others. (See paragraph (j)(1) of this section for 
 
 
 
requirements specific to the use of physical intervention techniques.) 
 
 
There are three categories of physical intervention techniques: 
 
 
(i)  
protective techniques, which include blocks, deflection strategies 
 
 
 
and grab releases; 
 
 
(ii)  
intermediate techniques, which include holds and escorts/removals 
 
 
 
intended to maintain a person in a standing or seated position to 
 
 
 
reduce or limit movement, to maintain health and safety, and/or to 
 
 
 
remove a person from an unsafe location or situation; and 
 
 
(iii)  
restrictive techniques, which include holds that restrict freedom of 
 
 
 
movement in order to interrupt or control behavior that is posing an 
 
 
 
immediate health or safety risk to the person or to others and  
 
 
 
involve taking a person from a standing position to the floor and 
 
 
 
holding the person on the floor. 
 
(26[4]) Intervention, restrictive/intrusive. These interventions include the 
 
 
 
following: 
 
 
(i)  
intermediate and/or restrictive physical intervention techniques (see 
 
 
 
paragraph (j)(1) of this section); 
 
 
(ii)  
the use of exclusionary time-out [(exclusionary and non 
 
 
 
 
exclusionary)] (see paragraph (j)(3) of this section); 
 
 
(iii)  
the use of any mechanical restraining device with the intent to 
 
 
 
modify or control challenging behavior (see paragraph (j)(4) of this 
 
 
 
section); 
 
 
(iv)  
the use of each medication for the purpose of preventing, 
 
 
 
 
modifying, or controlling challenging behavior that is not associated 
 
 
 
with a co-occurring diagnosed psychiatric disorder (see paragraph 
 
 
 
(j)(5) of this section); and 
 
 
(v)  
other professionally accepted methods to modify or control 
 
 
 
 
behavior which are determined by agency/facility policy to be  
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions because they may present a risk 
 
 
 
to a person’s protection or encroach unduly on a person’s normal 
 
 
 
activities (e.g., response cost, overcorrection, negative practice, 
 
 
 
non-exclusionary time out, and satiation). 
Physical intervention techniques and/or mechanical restraining devices used to facilitate 
emergency evacuations/drills or medical/dental exams, procedures, and related 
healthcare activities (and to protect individuals, healthcare providers, and others during 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
5 
 
such exams, procedures, and activities) are not considered to be restrictive/intrusive 
interventions that require inclusion in a behavior support plan. Such interventions may 
be incorporated in other individualized plans to address these situations. 
 
(27) 
Limitation, Rights. The limitation of a person’s rights as specified in section 
 
 
633.4 of this Part including, but not limited to: access to mail, telephone, 
 
 
visitation, personal property, electronic communication devices (e.g., cell 
 
 
phones, stationary or portable electronic communication or entertainment 
 
 
devices, computers), program activities and/or equipment, items 
 
 
 
commonly used by members of a household, travel to/in the community, 
 
 
privacy, or personal allowance.  
 
(28[5]) Master trainer. A party employed by OPWDD who has been approved to 
 
 
teach a curriculum approved by OPWDD on the use of positive behavioral 
 
 
approaches, strategies and/or supports and physical intervention 
 
 
 
techniques, and further certified by OPWDD to train and mentor new 
 
 
instructor-trainers and instructors in the teaching and implementation of 
 
 
the training curriculum. The master trainer serves in a leadership role 
 
 
overseeing the quality of Instructors, quality and consistency of trainings, 
 
 
and coordinating and monitoring implementation of the curriculum. The 
 
 
master trainer also reviews and approves new or modified physical  
 
 
intervention techniques as necessary. 
 
(29[6]) Mechanical restraining device. See device, mechanical restraining. 
 
(30[27]) Medication. For the purposes of this section, a pharmaceutical agent 
 
 
prescribed and used either to prevent, modify, or control challenging 
 
 
behavior, or to treat the symptoms of co-occurring diagnosed psychiatric  
 
 
disorders, by altering thoughts, feelings, mental activities, mood, or  
 
 
behavior. This definition includes medications which are not usually  
 
 
classified as psychotropic, when they are prescribed for their psychotropic 
 
 
effects such as mood stabilization or impulse control. (See subparagraph 
 
 
(j)(5)(vi) of this section for requirements specific to the use of medications 
 
 
used to treat a co-occurring diagnosed psychiatric disorder.) 
 
(31) Pads, blocking.  Any type of freestanding protective equipment or device 
 
 
(e.g. foam pads, mats, shields, bolsters, cushions, etc.), used to prevent 
 
 
or minimize harm from challenging behavior.  This may include devices to 
 
 
block aggression towards others or block efforts related to self-injurious 
 
 
behavior.  This definition does not include the use of a gel pad or dense 
 
 
foam pad used to prevent headbanging or other self-injury as part of a 
 
 
physical intervention procedure.  
 
(32) Modified clothing. See clothing, modified. 
 
(33[28]) Plan, behavior support. A written plan that outlines specific interventions 
 
 
designed to support, develop or increase replacement or alternative  
 
 
behaviors and/or modify or control a person’s challenging behavior. The  
 
 
plan is a component of a person's overall plan of services. Agencies may  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
6 
 
 
 
use other equivalent terms for such plans. (See subdivision (e) of this  
 
 
section.) 
 
(34[29]) Plan, monitoring. A plan developed by a licensed psychologist, licensed 
 
 
psychiatric nurse practitioner, psychiatrist, licensed clinical social worker, 
 
 
or a behavioral intervention specialist that identifies the target symptoms  
 
 
of a co-occurring diagnosed psychiatric disorder that are to be prevented,  
 
 
reduced, or eliminated. The plan shall specify interventions that will be  
 
 
used to address associated challenging behaviors that may occur, and  
 
 
methods by which progress in symptom control and functional  
 
 
 
improvement will be measured, documented, and reviewed. 
 
(35) Psychiatrist.  For the purposes of this section, a physician licensed in the  
 
 
state of New York and who is board certified in psychiatry by the American 
 
 
Board of Psychiatry and Neurology. 
 
(36[0]) Restrictive/intrusive intervention. See intervention, restrictive/intrusive. 
 
(37[1]) Senior member of the staff. See staff, senior member of the. 
 
(38[2]) Specialist, behavioral intervention (BIS). 
 
 
(i)  
Level 1 BIS. In order for a party to be a Level 1 BIS, the party must: 
 
 
 
(a)  
have the following educational background: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
at least a Master’s degree from a program in a clinical 
 
 
 
 
 
or treatment field of psychology, social work, school  
 
 
 
 
 
psychology, or applied psychology as it relates to  
 
 
 
 
 
human development and clinical interventions, and  
 
 
 
 
 
documented training in assessment techniques and  
 
 
 
 
 
behavior support plan development; or 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
a national board certification in behavior analysis  
 
 
 
 
 
(BCBA) or a NYS license as a Behavior Analyst  
 
 
 
 
 
(LBA); or[and a Master's degree in: 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  
behavior analysis; or 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
a field closely related to clinical or community 
 
 
 
 
 
 
psychology that is approved by OPWDD; or] 
 
 
 
 
(3)  
a New York State license in mental health counseling; 
 
 
 
 
 
and 
 
 
 
(b)  
have at least three[five] years of experience: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
working directly with individuals with developmental  
 
 
 
 
 
disabilities, including the development,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation, and monitoring of behavior support  
 
 
 
 
 
plans; and/or 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
providing supervision and training to others in the  
 
 
 
 
 
implementation of behavior support plans; or[.] 
 
 
 
(c) 
have been employed as a Level 2 BIS, at the master’s  
 
 
 
 
degree level, for three years. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
7 
 
 
 
(ii)  
Level 2 BIS. In order for a party to be a Level 2 BIS, the party must  
 
 
 
meet the qualifications outlined in clauses (a), (b), or (c) of this  
 
 
 
subparagraph: 
 
 
 
(a)  
The party must have a BCBA or an LBA[and a Master’s  
 
 
 
 
degree in: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
behavior analysis; or 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
a field closely related to clinical or community   
 
 
 
 
 
psychology that is approved by OPWDD]; or 
 
 
 
(b)  
The party must: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
have either: 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  
a Master’s degree in a clinical or treatment field 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of psychology, social work, school psychology,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied psychology as it relates to human  
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and clinical intervention, or a  
 
 
 
 
 
 
related human services field; or 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
a New York State license in mental health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
counseling; and 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
have or obtain OPWDD-approved specialized training 
 
 
 
 
 
or experience in functional assessment techniques  
 
 
 
 
 
and behavior support plan development; or 
 
 
 
(c)  
The party must: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
have a Bachelor’s degree in a human services field;  
 
 
 
 
 
and 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
have provided behavioral services for an agency in  
 
 
 
 
 
the OPWDD system as of, and continuously since,  
 
 
 
 
 
December 31, 2012; and 
 
 
 
 
(3)  
either: 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  
is actively working toward a Master’s degree in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
an applied area of psychology, social work, or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
special education; or 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
completes at least one graduate-level course in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an applied health service area of applied  
 
 
 
 
 
 
psychology, social work, or special education  
 
 
 
 
 
 
each year. 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  
The qualifying Master’s degrees referenced in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
this paragraph, including any degree obtained  
 
 
 
 
 
 
through an online educational or distance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning program, must have been awarded by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
a regionally accredited college or university, or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
one recognized by the NYS Education   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department as following acceptable  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
educational practices. If the Master’s degree  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was awarded by an educational institution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
outside the United States and its territories, the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
party must provide independent verification of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
equivalency from one of the approved entities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
used by the NYS Department of Civil Service  
 
 
 
 
 
 
for educational equivalency reviews. 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  
Notwithstanding any other provision of this  
 
 
 
 
 
 
section, parties who are employed by New  
 
 
 
 
 
 
York State and function in a title included in a  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York State Civil Service title series shall  
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide behavioral services or supervision of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
such services described in this section as  
 
 
 
 
 
 
included in their job descriptions. 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  
Notwithstanding any other provision of this  
 
 
 
 
 
 
paragraph, a party may be considered a BIS in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the event that OPWDD has approved a waiver  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of a specific required qualification upon   
 
 
 
 
 
 
application of a provider (see paragraph (c)(12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of this section). 
 
(39[3]) Staff, senior member of the. As used in this section, that staff member, by  
 
 
whatever title he or she may be known who is designated by the chief  
 
 
executive officer (CEO) as a senior member of the administrative structure 
 
 
of an agency, and as such, may carry out designated responsibilities  
 
 
delegated by the CEO. This may be someone who is responsible for a  
 
 
group of facilities (e.g., team leader, residence manager, head of shift, unit 
 
 
supervisor). 
 
(40[34]) Team, program planning. For the purposes of this section, the program  
 
 
planning team includes at least a licensed psychologist, a licensed clinical  
 
 
social worker, or psychiatrist;[or] a[n] behavioral intervention specialist, the 
 
 
person, the service coordinator or party designated with the responsibility  
 
 
for coordinating a person’s plan of services, the person’s advocate or  
 
 
correspondent (including the Consumer Advisory Board for Willowbrook  
 
 
class members that it fully represents), and any other party deemed  
 
 
necessary for identifying a person’s behavioral needs and developing an  
 
 
appropriate plan to address those needs (e.g., direct support professional, 
 
 
health care professional). A registered nurse or other medical professional 
 
 
shall be a member of the team when the use of medication is part of the  
 
 
plan. 
 
(41[35]) Time-out. Time-out is an [restrictive/intrusive] intervention in which a  
 
 
person is temporarily removed from positive reinforcement or denied the  
 
 
opportunity to obtain positive reinforcement and during which the person is 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
9 
 
 
 
under constant visual and auditory contact and supervision. Time-out  
 
 
interventions include: 
 
 
(i)  
placing a person alone in a specific time-out room, commonly  
 
 
 
referred to as exclusionary time-out (See paragraph (j)(3) of this  
 
 
 
section for requirements specific to the use of exclusionary time- 
 
 
 
out.); 
 
 
(ii)  
removing the positively reinforcing environment from the individual,  
 
 
 
commonly referred to as non-exclusionary time-out. [(See  
 
 
 
 
paragraph (j)(3) of this section for requirements specific to the use  
 
 
 
of time-out.)] 
 
• Existing clause 633.16(c)(7)(ii)(c) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(c)  
restrictions of the amount of food or type of diet (including 
 
 
 
 
food/beverage consistency requirements)that a person  
 
 
 
 
consumes, or other health-related limitations may be made  
 
 
 
 
for clinical reasons related to the person’s specific  
 
 
 
 
 
healthcare status, pursuant to documentation and order by a 
 
 
 
 
qualified healthcare professional, which shall specify the  
 
 
 
 
clinical justification for the restriction and the time period that 
 
 
 
 
such restriction shall be in effect, and which shall be   
 
 
 
 
included in the individual’s written service plan, and in  
 
 
 
 
accordance with section 636-1.4 of this Title; 
 
• Existing subparagraphs 633.16(c)(8)(ii), (iv), and (v) are amended as 
follows: 
 
 
(ii) 
the use of exclusionary time-out [(exclusionary and non 
 
 
 
 
exclusionary)] (see paragraph (j)(3) of this section); 
 
 
(iv)  
the use of medication [solely] to prevent, modify, or control 
 
 
 
 
challenging behavior (see paragraph (j)(5) of this section); and 
 
 
(v)  
other professionally accepted methods to modify or control   
 
 
 
behavior which are determined by agency/facility policy to be  
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions because they impose a risk to a  
 
 
 
person’s protection or encroach unduly on a person’s normal  
 
 
 
activities (e.g., response cost, overcorrection, negative practice,  
 
 
 
non-exclusionary time out, and satiation). 
 
• Existing paragraph 633.16(c)(10) is amended to read as follows: 
 
(10)  Any objection to a person’s current or proposed behavior support plan or  
 
 
to a proposed revision of a current plan must be made following the  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
10 
 
 
 
process specified [as outlined] in section 633.12 of this Part, except for  
 
 
objections to the use of restrictive/intrusive interventions by the party  
 
 
providing informed consent and objections to medication use by an   
 
 
individual receiving services. (See subdivision (h) of this section.) 
 
 
• Existing paragraph 633.16(c)(12) is amended to read as follows: 
 
(12)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a party lacking the 
 
 
specified credentials may perform the functions of a Level I BIS, Level II  
 
 
BIS, [licensed psychologist, or licensed clinical social worker]or  
 
 
 
supervising clinician, as specified in this section if OPWDD has granted a  
 
 
waiver of a specific required qualification for that particular party. The  
 
 
waiver may limit the functions that may be performed by such party. 
 
 
(i)  
OPWDD may approve a waiver upon application of the provider if 
 
 
 
all of the following conditions are met: 
 
 
 
(a)  
the provider documents that it is unable to employ, or access 
 
 
 
 
contractual services from, a party who meets the 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements for a Level 1 BIS, Level 2 BIS, licensed  
 
 
 
 
psychologist, [or] licensed clinical social worker, or 
 
 
 
 
 
psychiatrist; and 
 
 
 
[(b)  
the provider is in a rural area; and] 
 
 
 
(b[c])  the provider has demonstrated a sustained hardship  
 
 
 
 
condition concerning its ability to obtain the necessary  
 
 
 
 
clinical services. 
 
 
(ii)  
In the event that New York State law requires licensure for parties 
 
 
 
to legally provide any of the services specified in this section, a 
 
 
 
party performing such services pursuant to a waiver which are  
 
 
 
inconsistent with the law may no longer perform those services. 
 
• Existing subdivision 633.16(d) is amended to read as follows: 
(d)  
Functional behavior[al] assessment. 
 
 
 
(1)  
Prior to the development of a behavior support plan to address  
 
 
 
challenging behavior that is not solely the result of a co-occurring   
 
 
diagnosed psychiatric disorder, a functional behavior[al] assessment must  
 
 
be completed by a clinician with training in functional behavior assessment 
 
 
techniques to obtain relevant information for effective intervention   
 
 
planning. A functional behavior[al] assessment must: 
 
 
 
(i)  
identify/describe the challenging behavior in observable and   
 
 
 
measureable terms; 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
include identification and consideration of the antecedents for the  
 
 
 
behavior(s); 
 
 
 
(iii)  
identify the contextual factors or setting events, including cognitive,  
 
 
 
environmental, social, physical, medical and/or psychiatric   
 
 
 
conditions, that create or may contribute to the behavior; 
 
 
 
(iv)  
identify the likely reason(s) or purpose(s) for the challenging   
 
 
 
behavior; 
 
 
 
(v)  
identify the [general conditions or] probable consequences that may 
 
 
 
maintain the behavior; 
 
 
 
(vi)  
determine whether[include an evaluation of whether environmental  
 
 
 
or social alterations, or] further assessments are needed to rule out  
 
 
 
a contextual factor that could be contributing to challenging   
 
 
 
behavior(s)[, would serve to reduce or eliminate the behavior(s)]; 
 
 
 
(vii)  
include an evaluation of preferred reinforcers or preference   
 
 
 
assessment; 
 
 
 
(viii)  consider multiple sources of data including, but not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
(a)  
information gathered through direct observations of the  
 
 
 
 
individual; 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
information gathered from interview and/or discussion with  
 
 
 
 
the individual, parent/caregiver, and other relevant service  
 
 
 
 
providers; and 
 
 
 
 
(c)  
a review of available clinical, medical, behavioral, or other  
 
 
 
 
data from the individual’s record and other sources; 
 
 
 
(ix)  
not be based solely on an individual’s documented history of   
 
 
 
challenging behaviors; and 
 
 
 
(x)  
provide a measurable and quantifiable baseline of the challenging  
 
 
 
behaviors that may include[ing] frequency, duration, intensity and/or 
 
 
 
latency across settings, activities, people, and times of day. 
 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
12 
 
 
(2)  
In exceptional circumstances (e.g., unexpected admission to a residential  
 
 
program) a behavior support plan may need to be developed or modified  
 
 
primarily on the basis of historical information to assure staff or the family  
 
 
care provider have sufficient tools and safeguards to manage potentially  
 
 
dangerous behaviors of the person who is beginning to receive services.  
 
 
In these cases, a functional behavior[al] assessment shall be completed  
 
 
within 60 days of admission or the commencement of services. 
 
(3) 
The functional behavior assessment should be reviewed and revised, as  
 
 
appropriate, when the behavior support plan is reviewed or revised. 
 
• Existing subdivision 633.16(e) is amended to read as follows: 
(e) Behavior support plan. 
 
(1)  
Level 1 Behavioral Intervention Specialists (BIS) may develop and/or  
 
 
provide supervision for behavioral support plans or services that do not  
 
 
include restrictive/intrusive interventions. Level 2 BIS may develop   
 
 
behavioral support plans or services that do not include  
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions under the supervision of Level 1 BIS.  
 
 
Behavior support plans or services which include restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
interventions may be developed by a Level 1 or a Level 2 BIS under the  
 
 
supervision of a licensed psychologist, [or] licensed clinical social worker  
 
 
(LCSW), or a psychiatrist (see paragraph (3) of this subdivision). 
 
(2)  
All behavior support plans must: 
 
 
(i)  
be developed by a BIS, [or a] licensed psychologist, [or a] licensed  
 
 
 
clinical social worker, or psychiatrist with training in behavioral  
 
 
 
intervention techniques; 
 
 
(ii)  
be developed or updated in consultation, as clinically appropriate,  
 
 
 
with the person receiving services and/or other parties who are or  
 
 
 
will be involved with implementation of the plan; 
 
 
(iii)  
be developed on the basis of a functional behavioral assessment of 
 
 
 
the target behavior(s); 
 
 
(iv)  
include a concrete, specific description of the challenging  
 
 
 
 
behavior(s) targeted for intervention; 
 
 
(v)  
include a hierarchy of evidence-informed[based] behavioral   
 
 
 
approaches, strategies and supports to address the target  
 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
behavior(s) requiring intervention, with the preferred methods being 
 
 
 
positive approaches, strategies and supports; 
 
 
(vi)  
include a personalized plan for actively reinforcing and teaching the 
 
 
 
person alternative skills and adaptive (replacement) behaviors that  
 
 
 
will help or reduce challenging behaviors and enhance or increase  
 
 
 
the individual’s personal satisfaction, degree of independence, or  
 
 
 
sense of success; 
 
 
(vii)  
include the least restrictive or least intrusive methods possible in  
 
 
 
the behavioral approaches, strategies and supports designed to  
 
 
 
address any behaviors that may pose an immediate risk to the  
 
 
 
health or safety of the person or others; 
 
 
(viii)  provide a method for collection of adaptive (replacement)[positive]  
 
 
 
and challenging[negative] behavioral data with which treatment  
 
 
 
progress may be evaluated; and 
 
 
(ix)  
include a schedule to review the effectiveness of the interventions  
 
 
 
included in the behavior support plan no less frequently than on a  
 
 
 
semi-annual basis, including examination of the frequency,   
 
 
 
duration, and intensity of the challenging behavior(s) as well as the  
 
 
 
replacement behaviors. 
 
(3)  
A behavior support plan which incorporates a restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
 
intervention and/or a limitation on a person’s rights (see paragraph (c)(9)  
 
 
of this section) shall be designed in accordance with the following: 
 
 
(i)  
Level 1 and/or Level 2 BIS who develop and/or provide behavior  
 
 
 
support services to implement behavior support plans which include 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions shall function under the  
 
 
 
 
supervision of a licensed psychologist, [or] licensed clinical social  
 
 
 
worker, or psychiatrist. 
 
 
(ii)  
A plan that incorporates a restrictive/intrusive intervention and/or a  
 
 
 
limitation on a person’s rights must include the following additional  
 
 
 
components: 
 
 
 
(a)  
a description of the person's behavior that justifies the  
 
 
 
 
incorporation of the restrictive/intrusive intervention(s) and/or 
 
 
 
 
limitation on a person’s rights to maintain or assure health  
 
 
 
 
and safety and/or to minimize challenging behavior; 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
a description of all positive, less intrusive, and/or other  
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive approaches that have been tried and  
 
 
 
 
have not been sufficiently successful prior to the inclusion of  
 
 
 
 
the current restrictive/intrusive intervention(s) and/or   
 
 
 
 
limitation on a person’s rights, or [and] a clear justification of  
 
 
 
 
why the use of less restrictive alternatives would be   
 
 
 
 
inappropriate or insufficient to maintain or assure the health  
 
 
 
 
or safety or personal rights of the individual or others; 
 
 
 
(c)  
designation of the interventions in a hierarchy of 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation, ranging from the most positive or least 
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive to the least positive or most  
 
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive, for each challenging behavior being 
 
 
 
 
addressed; 
 
 
 
(d)  
the criteria to be followed regarding postponement of other 
 
 
 
 
activities or services, if necessary and/or applicable (e.g., to 
 
 
 
 
prevent the occurrence or recurrence of dangerous or  
 
 
 
 
unsafe behavior during such activities); 
 
 
 
(e)  
a specific plan to minimize and/or fade the use of each 
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive intervention and/or limitation of a  
 
 
 
 
person’s rights, to eliminate the use of a restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
 
 
intervention and/or limitation of a person’s rights, and/or  
 
 
 
 
transition to the use of a less intrusive, more positive   
 
 
 
 
intervention; or, in the case of continuing medication to  
 
 
 
 
address challenging behavior, the prescriber’s rationale for  
 
 
 
 
maintaining medication use; 
 
 
 
(f)  
a description of how each use of a restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
 
 
intervention and/or limitation on a person’s rights is to be  
 
 
 
 
documented, including mandated reporting; and 
 
 
 
(g)  
a schedule to review and analyze the frequency, duration  
 
 
 
 
and/or intensity of use of the restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
 
 
 
intervention(s) and/or limitation on a person’s rights included  
 
 
 
 
in the behavior support plan. This review shall occur no less  
 
 
 
 
frequently than on a semi-annual basis. The results of this  
 
 
 
 
review must be documented, and the information used to  
 
 
 
 
determine if and when revisions to the behavior support plan 
 
 
 
 
are needed. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
15 
 
 
 
(iii)  
A behavior support plan incorporating the use of restrictive physical 
 
 
 
interventions and/or exclusionary time-out rooms is prohibited in  
 
 
 
family care homes and [hourly] community habilitation. However, a  
 
 
 
behavior support plan incorporating restrictive physical  
 
 
 
 
interventions in hourly community habilitation may be permitted if  
 
 
 
specifically authorized by OPWDD. 
 
(4)  
Prior to implementation of a behavior support plan which incorporates a  
 
 
limitation on a person’s rights and/or a restrictive/intrusive intervention[: 
 
 
(i)]  
the plan shall be approved by the behavior plan/human rights  
 
 
 
committee established pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section.[;  
 
 
 
and] 
(5) 
Prior to the implementation of a behavior support plan which incorporates a  
 
restrictive/intrusive intervention or a limitation of a person’s rights as specified in 
 
section 636-1.4 of this Title 
 
 
[(ii)]  written informed consent shall be obtained from the individual or 
 
 
 
appropriate consent-giver for restrictive/intrusive interventions. 
(6[5]) If a behavior support plan is necessary in more than one service setting, the 
 
agency developing such a plan shall consult and coordinate with other service 
 
settings, in order to prevent conflicting or inappropriate strategies. 
(7[6]) If an agency will be using a behavior support plan developed by a different service 
 
setting/agency, the agency that developed the plan shall provide documentation 
 
to the other service setting/agency regarding current informed consent for the 
 
plan and its approval by a behavior plan/human rights committee. 
(8[7]) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prevent the use of physical 
 
intervention techniques in an emergency when used in conformance with 
 
paragraph (j)(1) of this section. 
(9[8]) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prevent the use of limitations on a 
 
person’s rights in an emergency when used in conformance with paragraph (j)(2) 
 
of this section. 
(10[9]) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prevent the use of medication to 
 
prevent, modify, or control challenging behavior in an emergency when used in 
 
conformance with subparagraph (j)(5)(iv) of this section. 
 
 
• Existing subdivision 633.16(f) is amended to read as follows: 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
16 
 
(f)  
Behavior plan/human rights committee. 
 
(1)  
Every agency with oversight responsibilities for one or more programs that 
 
 
serve people in need of behavior support plans that include   
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions and/or rights limitations shall establish a  
 
 
behavior plan/human rights committee to protect the rights of persons  
 
 
whose behavior support plans incorporate the use of restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
interventions and/or a limitation on a person’s rights. It may be a separate  
 
 
committee created solely for the purpose of meeting the requirements of  
 
 
this section, or it may be part of another committee. [An agency is not  
 
 
required to have a behavior plan/human rights committee if: 
 
 
(i)  
no individual served is in need of a behavior support plan that  
 
 
 
includes a restrictive/intrusive intervention; and 
 
 
(ii)  
no individual served is in need of a behavior support plan that  
 
 
 
includes a limitation on the person’s rights.] 
 
(2)  
Agencies shall create their own behavior plan/human rights committee, if  
 
 
needed, or may coordinate with other agencies in the creation of a shared  
 
 
behavior plan/human rights committee. 
 
(3)  
Prior to the implementation of the proposed behavior support plans, the  
 
 
committee shall approve or refuse to approve, in writing, proposed plans  
 
 
which contain a limitation on a person’s rights (see paragraph (c)(9) of this 
 
 
section) and/or utilize one or more restrictive/intrusive interventions   
 
 
specified in paragraph (c)(8) of this section, except for monitoring plans in  
 
 
which medication is used solely for the treatment of a co-occurring   
 
 
diagnosed psychiatric disorder. The term psychiatric disorder means those 
 
 
psychiatric disorders which are recognized as such by the American  
 
 
Psychiatric Association or World Health Organization. For the purposes of  
 
 
this section, the term co-occurring psychiatric disorder does not refer to  
 
 
the following: intellectual disability [mental retardation], specific learning  
 
 
disorder[s], motor [skills] disorders, communication disorders, autism  
 
 
spectrum disorder[pervasive developmental disorders], social (pragmatic  
 
 
communication disorder), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders and  
 
 
disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders. [behavior disorders,  
 
 
and impulse control disorders.] 
 
(4)  
The committee must review the behavior support plans identified in   
 
 
paragraph (3) of this subdivision to verify that all required components are  
 
 
included (see subdivision (e) of this section). 
 
(5)  
The committee chairperson must verify that: 
 
 
(i)  
the proposed behavior support plans presented to the committee  
 
 
 
are approved for a time period up to [not to exceed] one year and  
 
 
 
are based on the needs of the person; and 
 
 
(ii)  
written informed consent is obtained prior to the implementation of  
 
 
 
the approved behavior support plan that contains  
 
 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive interventions or specific rights limitations as  
 
 
 
identified by section 636-1.4 of this Title. If written informed consent 
 
 
 
cannot be obtained [within a reasonable period of time] prior to the  
 
 
 
initiation or continuance of a plan, verbal consent may be accepted  
 
 
 
only for the period of time before written informed consent can be  
 
 
 
[reasonably] obtained. Verbal consent must be witnessed by two  
 
 
 
members of the staff, and documented in the person’s record. This  
 
 
 
verbal consent is valid for a period of up to 45 days and may not be 
 
 
 
renewed. 
 
(6)  
The committee must specifically approve (or refuse to approve): 
 
 
(i)  
the use of a mechanical restraining device that is not commercially  
 
 
 
available or is not designed for human use (e.g., modification of a  
 
 
 
commercially available device) pursuant to subclause (j)(4)(ii)(a)(2)  
 
 
 
of this section; and 
 
 
(ii)  
modification of intermediate and restrictive physical intervention  
 
 
 
techniques, and new intermediate and restrictive physical  
 
 
 
 
intervention techniques, consistent with the provisions of  
 
 
 
 
subparagraph (j)(1)(iii) of this section. 
 
(7)  
The committee shall review and make suggestions to the agency’s   
 
 
management and/or governing body about its policies, practices, and  
 
 
programs as they relate to topics addressed by this section. 
 
(8)  
Behavior plan/human rights committee membership. 
 
 
(i)  
A behavior plan/human rights committee must have a minimum of  
 
 
 
four members including: 
 
 
 
(a)  
a licensed psychologist or a behavioral intervention  
 
 
 
 
 
specialist, with training in assessment techniques and  
 
 
 
 
behavioral support plan development; 
 
 
 
(b)  
a clinician, currently licensed, certified, or registered in New  
 
 
 
 
York State as one of the following: social worker, physician,  
 
 
 
 
physician assistant, nurse practitioner, registered nurse,  
 
 
 
 
speech pathologist, occupational therapist, physical   
 
 
 
 
therapist, or pharmacist; and 
 
 
 
(c)  
an additional party, preferably with no ownership,  
 
 
 
 
 
employment relationship, or other interest in the agency.  
 
 
 
 
This party may be, but is not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
someone charged with the responsibility for  
 
 
 
 
 
 
advocating for a person's rights (e.g., an  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ombudsperson, a volunteer, or an advocacy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
organization representative); or 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
an individual[someone] with a developmental   
 
 
 
 
 
disability, or a guardian or family member of someone 
 
 
 
 
 
with a developmental disability. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
18 
 
 
 
(ii)  
A committee member must recuse himself/herself from reviewing a  
 
 
 
plan for a person for whom he/she is actively involved in the   
 
 
 
delivery of services. 
 
 
(iii)  
The committee must have a minimum of three members present to  
 
 
 
proceed with its deliberations. 
 
(9) 
Temporary approval by the behavior plan/human rights committee   
 
 
chairperson/designee may be provided for urgent situations in which a  
 
 
behavior plan has been created or updated to include a  
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive intervention or rights limitation and appropriate   
 
 
informed consent, where required, has been obtained.  In such cases,  
 
 
temporary approval may continue only until the committee is able to  
 
 
review and may not exceed 45 days. 
 
• Existing subparagraphs 633.16(g)(1)(i), (ii), and (iii) are amended to read as 
follows: 
 
 
(i)  
Written informed consent is required prior to implementation any  
 
 
 
time that a restrictive/intrusive intervention or a rights modification  
 
 
 
as specified in section 636-1.4 of this Title is included in a behavior  
 
 
 
support plan to modify or control challenging behavior. However, if  
 
 
 
written informed consent cannot be obtained [within a reasonable  
 
 
 
period of time] prior to the initiation or continuance of a plan, verbal  
 
 
 
consent may be accepted only for the period of time before written  
 
 
 
informed consent can be [reasonably] obtained. Verbal consent  
 
 
 
must be witnessed by two members of the staff, and documented in 
 
 
 
the person’s record. This verbal consent is valid for a period of up  
 
 
 
to 45 days and may not be renewed. 
 
 
(ii)  
Written informed consent is required prior to implementation of a 
 
 
 
physician's order for planned use of medication to treat a co-  
 
 
 
occurring diagnosed psychiatric disorder (see subparagraph   
 
 
 
(j)(5)(ii) of this section). However, if written informed consent cannot 
 
 
 
be obtained [within a reasonable period of time] prior to the   
 
 
 
initiation or continuance of a medication, verbal consent may be  
 
 
 
accepted only for the period of time before written informed consent 
 
 
 
can be [reasonably] obtained. Verbal consent must be witnessed by 
 
 
 
two members of the staff, and documented in the person’s record.  
 
 
 
This verbal consent is valid for a period of up to 45 days and may  
 
 
 
not be renewed. 
 
 
(iii)  
Written informed consent is also required for short-term use of  
 
 
 
medication when there is no behavior support plan. If it is  
 
 
 
 
necessary for the medication to be administered before written  
 
 
 
informed consent can be [reasonably] obtained, verbal consent  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
may be accepted for only the period of time before written informed  
 
 
 
consent can be [reasonably] obtained, but no longer than 45 days.  
 
 
 
Verbal consent must be witnessed by two members of the staff and 
 
 
 
documented in the person’s record. 
 
• Existing paragraphs 633.16(g)(2) and (3) are amended to read as follows: 
 
(2)  
Written informed consent shall be documented and kept in a person’s  
 
 
clinical record. 
 
(3)  
Written informed consent obtained in accordance with this subdivision  
 
 
shall be valid for up to [have a maximum duration of] one year. 
 
• Existing clause 633.16(g)(6)(i)(g) is amended to read as follows: 
 
 
 
(g)  
an informed consent committee (see paragraph (8) of this  
 
 
 
 
subdivision) or a court of competent jurisdiction. [(see   
 
 
 
 
paragraph (8) of this subdivision).] 
 
 
•  Existing subparagraph 633.16(g)(7)(i) is amended as follows: 
 
 
(i)  
In the first instance, it shall be the program planning team’s   
 
 
 
responsibility to determine the person’s capacity to give informed  
 
 
 
consent for each proposed restrictive/intrusive intervention. The  
 
 
 
team’s determination and documentation shall be included and  
 
 
 
available in the person’s record. 
 
• Existing paragraph 633.16(h)(1) is amended as follows: 
 
(1)  
Any objection to a person’s proposed behavior support plan or a proposed 
 
 
revision of a current plan (except those relating to restrictive/intrusive  
 
 
interventions or rights modifications specified in section 636-1.4 of this  
 
 
Title), must be made in accordance with the process that is outlined in  
 
 
section 633.12 of this Part. 
 
• Existing subparagraph 633.16(h)(2)(ii) is amended as follows: 
 
 
(ii)  
The following applies to the use of restrictive/intrusive interventions  
 
 
 
(except for the refusal of the person receiving services to take  
 
 
 
medication as described in paragraph (3) of this subdivision) and 
 
 
 
rights modifications specified in section 636-1.4 of this Title. If there 
 
 
 
is lack of informed consent, and the agency considers use of the  
 
 
 
intervention/treatment/specified rights modification to be necessary  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
to provide services safely and appropriately to the individual, the  
 
 
 
agency must apply for court approval for the use of such  
 
 
 
 
intervention/treatment/specified rights modification. Notice of such  
 
 
 
application shall be sent to MHLS at the time of filing. While such a  
 
 
 
court application is pending, the agency may only use the  
 
 
 
 
restrictive/intrusive intervention in accordance with the emergency  
 
 
 
use provisions set forth in paragraphs (j)(1) and (5) of this section.  
 
 
 
Agencies may also impose limitations on the person’s rights in an  
 
 
 
emergency (see paragraph (j)(2) of this section). However, if a  
 
 
 
surrogate consent giver has withdrawn consent for the  
 
 
 
 
administration of medication, and the immediate cessation of the  
 
 
 
administration of the refused medication would be harmful or  
 
 
 
dangerous to the person, then the medication shall be suspended  
 
 
 
in accordance with accepted medical practice. The surrogate shall  
 
 
 
be advised regarding the accepted medical practice for the   
 
 
 
suspension of the medication that is being followed by the agency. 
 
• Existing subparagraph 633.16(h)(3)(iv) is amended as follows: 
 
 
(iv)  
If repeated attempts to resolve the issue of refusal of medication  
 
 
 
intended to modify or control challenging behavior or to treat a  
 
 
 
diagnosed psychiatric disorder are unsuccessful, and the agency  
 
 
 
considers the administration of the medication to be necessary for  
 
 
 
effective treatment of the individual’s disorder, such agency must  
 
 
 
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a hearing to determine  
 
 
 
whether the individual has the capacity to make a reasoned   
 
 
 
decision with respect to the proposed medication use and whether  
 
 
 
the medication should be administrated over objection. Notice of  
 
 
 
any such application shall be given to the authorized surrogate  
 
 
 
decision maker, if any, and [the Mental Hygiene Legal Service]  
 
 
 
MHLS. 
 
• Existing subparagraphs 633.16(j)(1)(vi), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii) are amended as 
follows: 
 
 
(vi)  
After the use of any physical intervention technique (protective, 
 
 
 
intermediate, or restrictive), the person shall be inspected for  
 
 
 
possible injury as soon as reasonably possible after the intervention 
 
 
 
is used. The findings of the inspection shall be documented in the  
 
 
 
form and format specified by OPWDD or a substantially equivalent  
 
 
 
form. If an injury is suspected, medical care shall be provided or  
 
 
 
arranged. Any injury that meets the definition of a reportable   
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
incident (Per section 624.3 of this Title)or notable occurrence (per 
 
 
 
section 624.4 of this Title) [serious reportable incident] must also be 
 
 
 
reported in accordance with Part 624 of this Title. 
 
 
(x)  
The use of any intermediate or restrictive physical intervention  
 
 
 
technique in an emergency more than two times in a 30-day period  
 
 
 
or four times in a six month period shall require a comprehensive  
 
 
 
documented review by the person's program planning team, in  
 
 
 
consultation with a licensed psychologist, a licensed clinical social  
 
 
 
worker, psychiatrist, or behavioral intervention specialist. The team  
 
 
 
shall determine if there is a need for a behavior support plan to  
 
 
 
address the exhibited behavior(s), a need to change an existing  
 
 
 
plan, or to establish the criteria for determining if a plan will need to  
 
 
 
be developed in the future. 
 
 
(xi)  
The use of restrictive physical intervention techniques is not  
 
 
 
permitted in family care homes. The use of restrictive physical 
 
 
 
intervention techniques is not permitted in [hourly] community  
 
 
 
habilitation unless specifically authorized by OPWDD. 
 
 
(xii)  
The use of an intermediate or restrictive physical intervention  
 
 
 
technique that is not in conformance with the requirements of this  
 
 
 
section is considered to be a reportable incident [physical abuse]  
 
 
 
and must be reported pursuant to Part 624 of this Title (except as  
 
 
 
noted in subparagraph (xiii) of this paragraph). 
 
 
(xiii)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any physical  
 
 
 
contact that is necessary to address an immediate health or safety  
 
 
 
risk to the person or to others, and which does not involve the use  
 
 
 
of more force than necessary, shall not be considered a reportable  
 
 
 
abuse or restraint incident [to be physical abuse] pursuant to Part  
 
 
 
624 of this Title or a violation of the requirements of this section.  
 
 
 
However, in the event that the level of physical contact would be  
 
 
 
considered to be comparable to an intermediate or restrictive  
 
 
 
physical intervention, the agency must comply with the provisions  
 
 
 
of subparagraphs (vii)-(ix) of this paragraph concerning visual  
 
 
 
inspection for possible injury and notifications. In addition, the  
 
 
 
person’s program planning team must be notified. The person’s  
 
 
 
program planning team shall consider whether changes might be  
 
 
 
needed in an existing behavior support plan or whether a plan  
 
 
 
needs to be developed. 
 
• Existing subparagraph 633.16(j)(2)(iii) is amended as follows: 
 
 
(iii)  
The emergency or unplanned limitation of a person’s rights more 
 
 
 
than four times in a 30 day period, or an ongoing limitation in place  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
22 
 
 
 
 
for more than 30 days, shall require a comprehensive documented  
 
 
 
review by the program planning team in consultation with the  
 
 
 
licensed psychologist, licensed clinical social worker, psychiatrist,  
 
 
 
or behavioral intervention specialist. The team shall determine if  
 
 
 
there is a need for a behavior support plan to address the exhibited  
 
 
 
behavior(s), a need to change an existing plan, or to establish the  
 
 
 
criteria for determining if a plan will need to be developed in the  
 
 
 
future. 
 
• Existing subparagraphs 633.16(j)(3)(i)-(iv) is amended as follows: 
 
 
(i)  
Time-out is an [restrictive/intrusive] intervention in which a person is 
 
 
 
temporarily removed from positive reinforcement or denied the  
 
 
 
opportunity to obtain reinforcement and during which the person is  
 
 
 
under constant visual and auditory contact and supervision. Time- 
 
 
 
out interventions include: 
 
 
 
(a)  
placing a person alone in a specific time-out room,  
 
 
 
 
 
commonly referred to as exclusionary time-out; 
 
 
 
(b)  
removing the positively reinforcing environment from the  
 
 
 
 
individual, commonly referred to as non-exclusionary time- 
 
 
 
 
out. 
 
 
(ii)  
Time away, when a person is redirected to a quieter or less   
 
 
 
stimulating area of the program and where staff do not actively  
 
 
 
prevent egress from that area, is not considered a form of  
 
 
 
 
exclusionary time-out. 
 
 
(iii)  
Exclusionary t[T]ime-out shall not be used in an emergency. 
 
 
(iv)  
Requirements for the use of exclusionary time-out rooms. 
 
 
 
(a)  
The placement of a person alone in a room from which his or 
 
 
 
 
her normal egress (ability to leave) is prevented by a staff  
 
 
 
 
member’s direct and continuous physical action shall be  
 
 
 
 
considered exclusionary[a form of] time-out (see glossary).  
 
 
 
 
The use of a time-out room shall be in conformance with the  
 
 
 
 
following: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
such action shall be taken only in accordance with a  
 
 
 
 
 
person's behavior support plan; 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
constant auditory and visual contact shall be  
 
 
 
 
 
 
maintained. If at any time the person is engaging in  
 
 
 
 
 
behavior that poses a risk to his or her health or  
 
 
 
 
 
safety staff must intervene. 
 
 
 
(b)  
The use of a time-out room where normal egress is  
 
 
 
 
 
prevented, or placement of a person in a secured room or  
 
 
 
 
area from which he or she cannot leave at will, and which is  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
not in conformance with the requirements of this section is  
 
 
 
 
considered a reportable incident, pursuant to Part 624 of this 
 
 
 
 
Title. 
 
 
 
(c)  
The maximum duration of time a person can be placed in a  
 
 
 
 
time-out room shall not exceed one continuous hour. Use of  
 
 
 
 
a time-out room on five or more occasions within a 24-hour  
 
 
 
 
period shall require the review of the behavior support plan  
 
 
 
 
by the program planning team in consultation with the   
 
 
 
 
licensed psychologist, licensed clinical social worker,   
 
 
 
 
psychiatrist, or behavioral intervention specialist within three  
 
 
 
 
business days. 
 
 
 
(d)  
Each use of a time-out room in accordance with an  
 
 
 
 
 
individual’s behavior support plan shall be reported  
 
 
 
 
 
electronically to OPWDD in the form and format specified by  
 
 
 
 
OPWDD. 
 
 
 
(e)  
Any time a room is to be used for exclusionary time-out, that  
 
 
 
 
room must meet the following stipulations: 
 
• New paragraph 633.16(j)(4) is added as follows and existing 633.16(j)(4) is 
renumbered 633.16(j)(5) 
(4)  
Blocking pads. 
 
(i)  
General provisions. 
 
 
(a)  
Blocking pads shall be employed: 
 
 
 
(1)  
Only as a means to protect individuals or staff from harm. 
 
 
 
(2)  
Only in a defensive or protective manner. 
   
 
(b)  
Blocking pads may not be used: 
(1)  
In an offensive manner to move, physically redirect, push 
 
back, or physically contain a person. 
(2)  
To strike or hit an individual. 
(3)  
To remove an individual from an area.  
(4)  
To trap or contain a person against a wall, corner, room, or 
 
ground. 
(5)  
For the purpose of blocking or preventing a person from 
 
leaving a room or otherwise creating a situation that is 
 
effectively exclusionary “time out” as defined by this 
 
regulation. 
(ii)  
The use of blocking pads to prevent or minimize harmful consequences  
 
related to challenging behavior shall be in conformance with the following: 
(a)  
Planned use of blocking pads shall be specified in the individual’s 
 
behavior plan. 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
24 
 
(b)  
Blocking pads are not to be viewed as therapeutic or used in lieu of 
 
an ongoing comprehensive treatment plan designed to reduce or 
 
eliminate challenging behavior. 
(c)  
The use of blocking pads shall be documented.   
(d)  
The use of blocking pads in an emergency situation without a 
 
behavior plan is permitted.  If blocking pads have been used in an 
 
emergency more than six times in a six-month period, the team 
 
shall meet to determine whether the implementation of a behavior 
 
plan is necessary.  
(e)  
Blocking pads shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition 
 
and in good repair. 
(f)  
Agency policies/procedures governing the use of blocking pads 
 
shall address the sanitizing of the devices. 
(g)  
The behavior support plan shall specify the following conditions for 
 
the use of blocking pads: 
(1)  
the facts justifying the use of the pads; 
(2)  
staff or family care provider action required when the pads 
 
are used; 
(3)  
a description of how the use of the pads is expected to be 
 
reduced and eventually eliminated. 
 
 
(5[4])  Mechanical restraining devices. 
 
• Renumbered subclause 633.16(j)(5)(ii)(a)(2) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
 
(2)  
the device shall be commercially available (including 
 
 
 
 
 
situations in which a device has been specifically  
 
 
 
 
 
designed or adapted for the individual by a health  
 
 
 
 
 
care professional)and designed for human use.  
 
 
 
 
 
Alternatively, if the device is not commercially   
 
 
 
 
 
available or is not designed for human use (e.g.,  
 
 
 
 
 
modification of a commercially available device), it  
 
 
 
 
 
must be approved by the behavior plan/human rights  
 
 
 
 
 
committee and approved by OPWDD; and 
 
• Renumbered subclause 633.16(j)(5)(ii)(b)(1) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
mittens, helmets, face masks, goggles, and sleeve  
 
 
 
 
 
boards (by whatever name known), modified clothing  
 
 
 
 
 
[(e.g., jumpsuit, leotard, or custom-designed clothing  
 
 
 
 
 
such as shirts or pants made of non-shredable cloth),  
 
 
 
 
 
bolsters, and mats used to safely contain a person]; 
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
25 
 
 
• Renumbered subclause 633.16(j)(5)(ii)(i)(1) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
 
(1)  
Except when asleep a person in a mechanical   
 
 
 
 
 
restraining device shall be released from the device at 
 
 
 
 
 
least once every hour and fifty minutes for a period  
 
 
 
 
 
not less than 10 minutes, and provided the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunity for movement, exercise, necessary  
 
 
 
 
 
eating, drinking and toileting.  In the case of modified  
 
 
 
 
 
clothing only; removal from the clothing shall occur as 
 
 
 
 
 
specified in the physician’s order and consistent with  
 
 
 
 
 
the behavior plan, and at other appropriate times  
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g., changing, toileting, comfort needs). 
 
• Renumbered clause 633.16(j)(5)(ii)(j) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(j)  
At least once every 30 minutes (60 minutes for modified  
 
 
 
 
clothing), including when a person is asleep, or more   
 
 
 
 
frequently if directed by a physician or previously designated 
 
 
 
 
in a risk management or behavior support plan, the person’s  
 
 
 
 
physical needs, comfort, and safety shall be monitored.  
 
 
 
 
Monitoring shall incorporate any specific components that  
 
 
 
 
are included in the physician’s order (e.g., checking vital  
 
 
 
 
signs, skin integrity, and circulation). If the person is asleep,  
 
 
 
 
this monitoring shall be completed through observation only  
 
 
 
 
while not awakening the person. The person shall also be  
 
 
 
 
monitored after removal of the mechanical restraining   
 
 
 
 
device. Documentation of the monitoring and action taken  
 
 
 
 
must be entered in the person’s clinical record. 
 
• Existing paragraph 633.16(j)(5) is renumbered 633.16(j)(6) as follows: 
(6[5]) Medication. 
 
• Renumbered clause 633.16(j)(6)(ii)(d) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(d)  
The effectiveness of the medication shall be re-evaluated at  
 
 
 
 
least semi-annually at the program plan reviews by the  
 
 
 
 
program planning team in consultation with a licensed  
 
 
 
 
psychologist, licensed clinical social worker, psychiatrist, or  
 
 
 
 
behavior intervention specialist, and a health care  
 
 
 
 
 
professional. The goal(s) of this aspect of the plan review  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
include: ensuring that medication is at the minimum and  
 
 
 
 
most effective dose; identifying a potential need for a   
 
 
 
 
medication with fewer or less intrusive side effects;  
 
 
 
 
 
evaluating the evidence presented to support continuation of 
 
 
 
 
the medication at a maintenance level, or recommending  
 
 
 
 
reduction or discontinuation of medication use if clinically  
 
 
 
 
indicated and authorized by the prescriber. 
 
• Renumbered clauses 633.16(j)(6)(iii)(d) and (h) are amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(d)  
The staff person or family care provider who is responsible  
 
 
 
 
for support and supervision of a person who has a behavior  
 
 
 
 
support plan or monitoring plan must document in the   
 
 
 
 
person’s clinical record a summary of the results of each[the] 
 
 
 
 
medication use in behavioral terms. 
 
 
 
 
(h)  
If the as-needed medication is not administered during a six- 
 
 
 
 
month period, the program planning team, in consultation  
 
 
 
 
with the licensed psychologist, licensed clinical social   
 
 
 
 
worker, psychiatrist, or behavioral intervention specialist,  
 
 
 
 
must review the behavior support plan and develop a   
 
 
 
 
recommendation to the prescriber regarding the  
 
 
 
 
 
appropriateness of continuing the as-needed medication as  
 
 
 
 
part of the plan. If the order is continued, a clear justification  
 
 
 
 
is to be documented in the record. 
 
• Renumbered clause 633.16(j)(6)(iv)(d) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(d)  
The emergency use of medication to control challenging  
 
 
 
 
behavior or acute symptoms of a co-occurring diagnosed  
 
 
 
 
psychiatric disorder in more than four instances in a 14-day  
 
 
 
 
period shall require a comprehensive review by the program  
 
 
 
 
planning team in consultation with the licensed psychologist,  
 
 
 
 
a licensed clinical social worker, psychiatrist, or behavioral  
 
 
 
 
intervention specialist within three business days of the fifth  
 
 
 
 
medication administration. 
 
• Renumbered clause 633.16(j)(6)(v)(d) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(d)  
Within five working days of the first administration of the  
 
 
 
 
medication or of the admission to such programs of a person 
 
 
 
 
with such a pre-existing medication regimen, a person's  
Proposed Regulations 
 
Note:  New material is underlined and deleted material is in [brackets]. 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
program planning team, in consultation with a licensed  
 
 
 
 
psychologist, licensed clinical social worker, psychiatrist, or  
 
 
 
 
behavioral intervention specialist, shall conduct a review of  
 
 
 
 
the circumstances which necessitated the use of such  
 
 
 
 
medication. The program planning team shall determine if it  
 
 
 
 
is necessary to develop a behavior support plan to prevent,  
 
 
 
 
modify, or control the behavior or to modify an existing plan  
 
 
 
 
of services, or shall establish the criteria for a future decision 
 
 
 
 
that a plan will be needed. All determinations shall be   
 
 
 
 
documented. 
 
• Renumbered clause 633.16(j)(6)(vi)(b) is amended as follows: 
 
 
 
(b)  
The term psychiatric disorder means those psychiatric  
 
 
 
 
disorders which are recognized as such by the American  
 
 
 
 
Psychiatric Association or World Health Organization. For  
 
 
 
 
the purposes of this section, the term co-occurring  
 
 
 
 
 
psychiatric disorder does not refer to the following:  
 
 
 
 
 
intellectual disability, specific learning disorder, motor   
 
 
 
 
disorders, communication disorders, autism spectrum   
 
 
 
 
disorder, social (pragmatic) communication disorder,    
 
 
 
 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and disruptive,   
 
 
 
 
impulse-control, and conduct disorders[mental retardation,  
 
 
 
 
learning disorders, motor skills disorders, communication  
 
 
 
 
disorders, pervasive developmental disorders, attention- 
 
 
 
 
deficit and disruptive behavior disorders, and impulse control 
 
 
 
 
disorders]. 
