 
 
Crisis/Emergency Intervention Plan for Residence 
 
 
Emergency interventions shall be used only in situations in which alternative procedures and methods not 
involving the use of physical force cannot reasonably be employed, interventions outlined in this addendum must 
only be used in an emergency situation after all planned strategies listed in the behavior intervention plan have 
been utilized and it has been deemed unsafe to continue to employ. The physical interventions described below 
must only be used in situations where the student becomes a danger to themselves or others, or property damage. 
 
(SCIP-R) certified staff will implement the following New York State Strategies for Crisis Intervention and 
Prevention – Revised approved techniques and will remain in effect until it is safe or for up to 20 (twenty) minutes. 
 
CORE TECHNIQUES 
 
☒Touch/Touch with a Grasp 
☐Back Hair Pull Stabilization / Release 
☒Front Deflection 
☐Back Hair Pull Stabilization / Release with Assistance 
☒Bite Release 
☐Blocking Punches 
☐One Arm Release 
☐Approach Prevention 
☐Two Arm Release  
☒Front Arm Catch 
☐Front Choke Windmill Release  
☐Front Kick Avoidance/Deflection 
☐Back Choke Release 
☐Protection from Thrown Objects 
☐Front Hair Pull Stabilization / Release 
 
 
 
SPECIALIZED TECHNIQUES 
 
☒One Person Escort 
☐Standing Wrap 
☐One Person Escort – Seated Variation 
☒Bite Prevention Front Hold 
☐Two Person Escort 
☐Front Choke Release 
☐Two Person Escort – Seated Variation 
☐One Person Wrap / Removal 
☐Arm Control by One Person or With Assistance 
☐Two Person Removal 
 
 
RESTRICTIVE TECHNIQUES 
 
☐Two Person Take Down 
☐Two or Three person supine control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USE OF SCIP-R 
What data will be 
collected? 
When and how will it be 
collected? 
Who will collect it? 
Who will summarize it? 
Frequency of 
interventions used 
Staff will record the count 
of intervention used on 
the data sheet; behavior 
staff will review at least 
monthly 
Residential staff 
members 
Behavior Specialist/Analyst  
Name 
 
Date of Plan 
6/13/2025 
Date of Birth 
 
Date of Consent 
(Parental/Guardian/ICC) 
 
Behavior Team 
 
Date of HRC Approval/ 
Implementation 
 
Any use of Restrictive Techniques requires reporting to QI and a completed incident report.  Notify 
nursing as necessary to complete body check and further assess. 
 
All data regarding SCIP-R techniques will be collected, input, and reviewed at least monthly. 
 
Restrictions 
Restriction 
Rationale/Additional Information 
Criteria for Restriction Fading** 
 
SCIP-R 
To protect the safety of the individual and others 
in the environment 
Use of SCIP-R procedures will be 
reviewed annually. Procedures not 
used during the review period will 
be removed from the plan.  
Medication 
Psychotropic medication is prescribed for 
behavioral purposes and monitored frequently 
by psychiatrist.  
Changes are made at the discretion 
of the medical provider based on 
feedback from treatment team and 
family. 
Medications for Sleep 
CenterWide Sleep Hygiene Guidelines are 
followed  
Changes are made at the discretion 
of the medical provider based on 
feedback from treatment team and 
family. 
Exterior Door Alarms; 
Room Alarm; Window 
Blocks; Project 
Lifesaver device 
Current elopement from residential setting 
After 0 instances of Elopement  
Attempts or Successes for 12 
consecutive months, the restriction 
will be removed. 
 
**The Antecedent/Prevention Strategies and Replacement Behavior Teaching Strategies in the Behavior 
Intervention Plan are in place to support positive behavior change. It is expected that these strategies will reduce 
the target behaviors that are necessitating restrictions. 
 
 
 
 
 
