 
 
XX BIP Page 1 of 5 
 
 
 
Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP) 
 
 
The strategies below are based on a Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) from June 2024. The FAST was completed 
in May 2025 and the results were consistent with the previous FBA suggesting the functions of the behavior have remain 
unchanged. XXXXX requires individualized strategies beyond the Center-Wide Positive Behavior Intervention and Support 
Plan to address his challenging behaviors.     
 
Target Behaviors 
 
Self-Injury: slapping with an open hand, hitting with a closed fist, poking with his fingers pushed together, biting toward 
his arm/hand, and/or skin-picking. XXXXX will typically slap or hit toward his face, neck, or head. Poking or skin-picking 
can occur toward multiple areas on his body and XXXXX will pick or poke new or existing injuries.  Please note: At times, 
XXXXX may discreetly rub his body on a surface (occasionally causing redness, opened areas, and injury); this is not 
currently tracked as it can be difficult to observe.   
Precursor Behaviors: crying, perseverating on an item/activities. 
Antecedents/Setting Events: denied or limited access to items/activities, waiting, unstructured downtime, and/or seated 
tasks.  
Hypothesis of Behavior Function: Access to tangible items/activities, escaping aversive activities or events, seeking 
sensory input.  
 
Impulsivity: food-seeking/rummaging in various areas for food and taking food items with rapid ingestion/attempts. This 
does not include meals that are provided to XXXXX that follow his diet order and food preparation consistency. It does 
include quick and unsafe attempts to grab/ingest food/beverages from the environment. 
Precursor Behaviors: staring at food/beverages/kitchen areas, repeated requests for food/beverages, crying.  
Antecedents/Setting Events: seeing food/beverages in his environment, watching others eat/drink, waiting for preferred 
items/meals, unstructured downtime, and/or limited supervision around areas where food is stored.  
Hypothesis of Behavior Function: Access to tangible items/activities, sensory.  
 
Mouthing: mouthing/chewing/licking items without ingestion. This can include, but is not limited to, clothing (shirt sleeves, 
collars), markers/pens, and activities of daily living (ADL) products,  
Precursor Behaviors: looking toward an item that he may place toward his mouth; a precursor may not always occur 
before an episode.  
Antecedents/Setting Events: Same as Impulsivity. 
Hypothesis of Behavior Function: Same as Impulsivity. 
 
 
Preferred Items/Activities: Various sensory items/activities (including, but not limited to): a Bosu ball, Thera-putty, a 
physioball (various sizes), balance beams, stepping stones, cushions (placed under feet), a balance board, OT brush, 
handheld vibration, bolsters, and wooden puzzles. The sensory items/activities listed here can be presented using an 
obstacle course format or within a seat. Obstacle courses and exercises (including walks), can be helpful to present 
before a seated task. Input to his hands with hand squeezes, an OT brush, or handheld vibration help when he is 
excessively scratching or before he completes an activity requiring gloves. Other leisure items/activities include: 
baking/cooking activities, the pool, and watching specific TV shows (The Wiggles).  
 
Name 
 
Date of Plan 
6.3.2025 
Date of Birth 
 
Date of Consent 
(Parental/Guardian/ICC) 
 
Behavior Team Members 
 
Date of HRC Approval/ 
Implementation 
 
 
 
XX BIP Page 2 of 5 
 
Intervention Plan 
 
ANTECEDENT/PREVENTION STRATEGIES 
*THESE STRATEGIES ARE IN ADDITION TO THE CENTER-WIDE POSITIVE BEHAVIOR INTERVENTION AND SUPPORT PLAN (ATTACHED) 
• 
Limit unstructured downtime by incorporating a movement break (obstacle course, walk), sensory item, or 
functional task into XXXXX’s schedule. Offer movement breaks before a seated work task. 
• 
If a task involves gloves, provide a choice of sensory input: hand squeezes, brushing his hands, or using 
handheld vibration before putting the gloves on.  
• 
Encourage activities where he can use both hands: folding clothes, gardening, washing dishes, or using 
sensory items. 
• 
Keep food items/beverages that are not intended for XXXXX (staff personal items, peer items) in a designated 
location. Offer statements about food/beverages that are available to him and times when he will have access 
to a meal/drink, especially when he is requesting. Maintain body proximity and supervision between XXXXX 
and others; he may attempt to quickly take a food item from others. 
• 
Ensure items that could be brought to his mouth are closely monitored when in use (soaps, lotion, markers, 
and small items). Redirect attempts to place an item in his mouth and contact nursing if there is any concern 
for ingestion.  
 
 
 
CONSEQUENCE STRATEGIES 
SELF-INJURY: 
• 
Minimize verbal redirection of self-injury and redirect his hands using gesture or physical prompts.  
• 
Remove any unsafe objects that could be used to hit toward himself.  
• 
Offer a choice of activity from the preferred items/activities listed above.  
 
IMPULSIVITY & MOUTHING: 
• 
Please note: attempts to access food are very quick and opportunistic. Ensure that you are adhering to 
XXXXX’s supervision profile checklist and diet order. Keep personal food items out of sight and take your own 
breaks with food in an area that is out of sight from XXXXX.  
• 
If seeking access to food, use body proximity or physical redirection to limit or block access to an item.  
• 
Offer reminders of the daily schedule and when he will have access to a food item/beverage. 
• 
If XXXXX attempts to take an item from the garbage, block access and encourage him to wash his hands.  
• 
If XXXXX places a non-food item toward his mouth, redirect him to “spit it out.” DO NOT place your fingers in 
his mouth. Contact nursing if there is any concern for ingestion or licking an unsafe or toxic product. Follow 
nursing guidance. If mouthing involves a clothing item that he is wearing, redirect the item from his mouth and 
offer sensory items/activities.   
 
 
 
Replacement Behaviors 
 
Replacement Behavior  
Teaching Method 
*Prompts will be faded until independent 
responding is achieved. 
Response  to Behavior 
 
Accepting An Alternative 
XXXXX will be offered an alternative item/activity 
following a request that cannot be fulfilled.  
 
For example, XXXXX may request for an 
item/activity. If it is an item that is not available in 
the moment, offer a choice of two items that are 
available by saying “we can have that later, but 
right now we have __ or ___.  
 
XXXXX will be provided the 
alternative if accepted. 
 
Error Correction: If XXXXX engages 
in self-injury, impulsivity, or mouthing, 
limit verbal responses and redirect 
self-injury attempts. When he returns 
to a calm state (no precursor or 
challenging behavior), offer 
alternative choice options.  
 
 
 
XX BIP Page 3 of 5 
 
Restrictions 
 
Restriction 
Rationale/Additional Information 
Criteria for Restriction Fading** 
 
 
Medication 
Psychotropic medication is prescribed for 
behavioral purposes and monitored frequently by 
psychiatrist.  
Changes are made at the discretion of 
the medical provider based on 
feedback from treatment team and 
family. 
**The Antecedent/Prevention Strategies and Replacement Behavior Teaching Strategies in the Behavior Intervention Plan are in place 
to support positive behavior change. It is expected that these strategies will reduce the target behaviors that are necessitating 
restrictions. 
 
Baseline Data 
 
Baseline Information Complied: 3.1.2025-5.31.2025 
Shifts Included In Baseline Data: 7-3; 3-11 
 
Self-Injury  
Frequency 
Duration 
Intensity 
Onset 
Trend 
2.55 episodes 
per shift  
(About 153 episodes 
per 
month)* 
Typically brief; 0-5 
minutes. Hits/slaps 
can be quick. An 
episode can last up 
to 10 minutes.  
Varies. Episodes 
range from a mild-
severe intensity. 
Episodes labeled 
moderate or severe 
have led to injury, 
opened areas, 
bruising. 
Since Admission 
Decreasing 
 
Impulsivity  
Frequency 
Duration 
Intensity 
Onset 
Trend 
1.58 episodes per 
shift 
(About 94 episodes 
per month)* 
Typically brief; 
episodes will mostly 
last under 5 minutes 
or until redirected  
Typically managed 
with effective use of 
space and 
environmental 
prevention strategies.  
Since Admission 
Slightly decreasing 
 
Mouthing  
Frequency 
Duration 
Intensity 
Onset 
Trend 
0.57 episodes per 
Shift  
(About 34 episodes 
per  
Month)* 
Typically brief; 0-5 
minutes 
Typically managed 
with effective use of 
space 
Since Admission 
Stable  
*Estimated based on shift data 
Behavioral Goal(s) 
 
Long-Term Objective: 
On average, XXXXX will exhibit self-injury no more than 1.02 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
Short-Term Objective: 
1. On average, XXXXX will exhibit self-injury no more than 2.17 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
2. On average, XXXXX will exhibit self-injury no more than 1.79 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
3. On average, XXXXX will exhibit self-injury no more than 1.40 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
 
Long-Term Objective: 
On average, XXXXX will exhibit impulsivity no more than 0.63 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
Short-Term Objective: 
1. On average, XXXXX will exhibit impulsivity no more than 1.34 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
 
 
XX BIP Page 4 of 5 
 
2. On average, XXXXX will exhibit impulsivity no more than 1.11 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
3. On average, XXXXX will exhibit impulsivity no more than 0.87 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
 
 
Long-Term Objective: 
On average, XXXXX will exhibit mouthing no more than 0.23 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
Short-Term Objective: 
1. On average, XXXXX will exhibit mouthing no more than 0.48 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
2. On average, XXXXX will exhibit mouthing no more than 0.40 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
3. On average, XXXXX will exhibit mouthing no more than 0.31 times per shift for three consecutive months. 
 
Evaluation Procedures 
 
What data will be 
collected? 
When and how will it be 
collected? 
Who will collect it? 
Who will summarize it? 
Frequency/intensity of Self-
Injury 
Staff will record episodes 
on a provided data sheet.  
Day Habilitation & 
Residential staff members 
Behavior Analyst  
 
Frequency/duration of 
Impulsivity  
Staff will record episodes 
on a provided data sheet 
of attempts or successes. 
Day Habilitation & 
Residential staff members 
Behavior Analyst  
 
Frequency of Mouthing 
Staff will record episodes 
on a provided data sheet. 
Day Habilitation & 
Residential staff members 
Behavior Analyst  
 
Frequency/Percent 
Occurrence of Replacement 
Behavior 
Probe data. 
Behavior Analyst, Day 
Habilitation & Residential 
staff members 
Behavior Analyst  
 
 
Schedule of Review 
 
BIPs will be reviewed semi-annually during the following months listed below: 
Semi-annual Review in: 
December, 2025 
 
June, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XX BIP Page 5 of 5 
 
 
