Make sure individuals can communicate at all times with their 'voice' – have icons, devices or
other communication supports available if applicable.
Keep devices charged and ready during waking hours
Make sure communication supports travel with the individual.
Only one person should speak to an individual at a time.
Allow adequate processing time after speaking or giving directions.
Avoid personal conversations in front of students/residents.
Tell individuals what they CAN do or CAN have, instead of what not to do or what they can't have.
Recognize and respond to all forms of communication - unless otherwise directed in
individual's Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP).
Communication
Respond to warning signs to prevent escalation.
Show empathy during times of distress.
Example: “I can see that you are upset right now. I am here to help you.”
Use behavior-speciﬁc praise frequently and more often than corrective feedback (~4 praises to
1 correction).
Give the individual(s) you are caring for your full attention by being positive, open and available.
Ensure individuals experience success by providing opportunities to engage in mastered tasks
and by adapting materials to maximize participation.
Success helps people feel good about themselves! 
Compassion
Oﬀer choices throughout the day.
Drop the rope! Limit power struggles by identifying and honoring choices. Prioritize what is
important. While you need to always maintain safety ﬁrst, you can allow students/residents to
be in control and follow THEIR lead instead. 
 Ensure many preferred and generally liked activities are available throughout the day.
Choices
Use consistent transition routines (e.g., warnings, schedules, transition areas).
Keep areas organized and clean.
Minimize unstructured downtime.
Be prepared for an activity before bringing individuals to participate.
Eﬀectively use prompts and clear and concise instructions to ensure success.
When working in groups, keep individual engagement high by addressing every 1-2 minutes.
Clarity
The Centerwide 4 C’s
The Center for Discovery Positive Behavioral 
Intervention and Support Plan
